Add python ADBC examples (#1007)
duckdb/duckdb-web: docs/api/adbc.md

|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| `StatementBindStream` |  Bind Arrow Stream. This can be used for bulk inserts or prepared statements.| `(AdbcStatement*, ArrowArrayStream*, AdbcError*)` | `StatementBindStream(&adbc_statement, &input_data, &adbc_error)` |

## Examples

> Regardless of the programming language being used, there are two database

Reviewer: please drop superfluous newlines after "two database" and "how you can do so".

Author: done

> options which will be required to utilize ADBC with DuckDB. The first one is the `driver`, which takes a path to the DuckDB library. The second option is the `entrypoint`, which is an exported function from the DuckDB-ADBC driver that initializes all the ADBC functions. Once we have configured these two options, we can optionally set the `path` option, providing a path on disk to store our DuckDB database. If not set, a memory database is created. After configuring all the necessary options, we can proceed to initialize our database. Below is how you can do so

Reviewer: "a memory database" -> "an in-memory database"

ArrowArrayStream arrow_stream;
```

> We can then initialize our database variable. Before initializing the database, we need to set the `driver` and `entrypoint` variables as mentioned above. Then we set the `path` option and initialize the database.

Reviewer: 1) instead of "variables", I'd use the term "options" to be in line with the function name `AdbcDatabaseSetOption`
2) please emphasize in the text that the `libduckdb` file should be the dynamic library of DuckDB, which is `.dylib` on MacOS, `.so` on Linux, and `.dll` on Windows.

Author: updated

StatementBindStream(&adbc_statement, &arrow_stream, &adbc_error);
StatementExecuteQuery(&adbc_statement, nullptr, nullptr, &adbc_error);
```

### Python

The first thing to do is to use `pip` and install the ADBC Driver manager.

```shell
pip install adbc_driver_manager
```

You will also need the `pyarrow` package to directly access Apache Arrow
formatted result sets.
```shell
pip install pyarrow
```

The full documentation for the `adbc_driver_manager` package can be found

> [here](https://arrow.apache.org/adbc/0.5.1/python/api/adbc_driver_manager.html).

Reviewer 2: Can you link to `current` instead?

> As with C++, we need to provide initialization options for an `AdbcDatabase` object. 

Reviewer 2: I don't know we want to document this. One, this will all change when we have PyCapsules. Two, it's really confusing compared to using the DB-API interface below.

Author: So, only document the DBAPI interface?

Reviewer 2: I think that's preferable.

Author: Okay, i'll update this

Author: how's the current version @lidavidm ?

Reviewer 2: LGTM, thanks!

StatementBindStream(&adbc_statement, &arrow_stream, &adbc_error);
StatementExecuteQuery(&adbc_statement, nullptr, nullptr, &adbc_error);
```

### Python

The first thing to do is to use `pip` and install the ADBC Driver manager.

```shell
pip install adbc_driver_manager
```

You will also need the `pyarrow` package to directly access Apache Arrow
formatted result sets.
```shell

> pip install pyarrow

Reviewer 3: Combine this install call with the one above?

```

The full documentation for the `adbc_driver_manager` package can be found
[here](https://arrow.apache.org/adbc/current/python/api/adbc_driver_manager.html).

> As with C++, we need to provide initialization options 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As with C++, we need to provide initialization options:
```

```python
import adbc_driver_manager.dbapi
conn = adbc_driver_manager.dbapi.connect(
    driver="path/to/libduckdb.dylib",
    entrypoint="duckdb_adbc_init",
    db_kwargs={"path": "test.db"},
)

with conn.cursor() as cur:
    pass

conn.close()
```

It is also possible to leverage the duckdb Python library directly:
```python
import duckdb
import adbc_driver_manager.dbapi
conn = adbc_driver_manager.dbapi.connect(
    driver=duckdb.__file__,
    entrypoint="duckdb_adbc_init",
    db_kwargs={"path": "test.db"}
)

with conn.cursor() as cur:
    pass

conn.close()
```

> Now that we have a connection initialized, we can initialize a cursor

Reviewer: 1) Please weave these two examples together. Currently, the first example is just opens a connection and closes it immediately. The second one has `...` for where the imports should happen `conn` should be initialized.
2) Please print something (`print(tbl)`, `print(df)`, ...) to stdout so the user can see that something is happening.
3) The `fetchone`/`fetchall` functions should be mentioned in the text, not in comments.
4) Maybe push the `conn` initialization into the same `with` block like so?

```py
with adbc_driver_manager.dbapi.connect(
        driver=duckdb.__file__,
        entrypoint="duckdb_adbc_init",
        db_kwargs={"path": "test.db"}
    ) as conn, conn.cursor() as cur:
    cur.execute("SELECT 42")
    # fetch as a pyarrow table
    tbl = cur.fetch_arrow_table()
    print(tbl)
```

Author: Done

for running queries. 

```python
import pyarrow
...

with conn.cursor() as cur:
    cur.execute("SELECT 42")
    # fetch as a pyarrow table
    tbl = cur.fetch_arrow_table()
    # alternately as a pandas dataframe
    df = cur.fetch_df()
    # you can also use fetchone/fetchall
    # and fetchmany as per DBAPI (PEP 249)
```

> Data can also be ingested via `arrow_streams`. We just need to set options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data can also be ingested via `adbc_ingest`. We just need to set options
```

Did you mean this?

Author: Hmm i was following the documentation prose from the C++ example. I think it was explicitly saying you can use Arrow data record batches to ingest into the db.

Reviewer: If I run:
```py
import duckdb
import adbc_driver_manager.dbapi
import pyarrow

conn = adbc_driver_manager.dbapi.connect(
    driver=duckdb.__file__,
    entrypoint="duckdb_adbc_init",
    db_kwargs={"path": "test.db"}
)

data = pyarrow.record_batch(
    [[1, 2, 3, 4], ["a", "b", "c", "d"]],
    names=["ints", "strs"],
)

with conn.cursor() as cur:
    cur.adbc_ingest("AnswerToEverything", data)   
```

I get:
```text
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 2, in <module>
  File "/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/adbc_driver_manager/dbapi.py", line 769, in adbc_ingest
    self._stmt.set_options(
  File "adbc_driver_manager/_lib.pyx", line 1114, in adbc_driver_manager._lib.AdbcStatement.set_options
  File "adbc_driver_manager/_lib.pyx", line 385, in adbc_driver_manager._lib.check_error
adbc_driver_manager._lib.ProgrammingError: ADBC_STATUS_INVALID_ARGUMENT (5)
```

Do you have any suggestion why this happens?

Reviewer 4: > 

This needs `duckdb.duckdb.__file__`, but this was written at a time where we did not have `adbc_driver_duckdb` yet, this logic has been wrapped up in that module.

See https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/blob/main/tools/pythonpkg/tests/fast/adbc/test_statement_bind.py for an example of how to work with the module

Author: @Tishj If i try `duckdb.duckdb.__file__` I get 

```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: module 'duckdb' has no attribute 'duckdb'
```

It also appears that it's duckdb that is returning `ADBC_STATUS_INVALID_ARGUMENT` as an error when calling `AdbcStatementSetOption` with key `adbc.ingest.mode` and value `adbc.ingest.mode.create`, which is internally called by `adbc_ingest`. 

I'm using `python-duckdb` v0.8.1, is there something I'm missing? The test file you linked doesn't use `adbc_ingest` at all, nor does it try calling `set_option` on the statement.

Author: Ah, i figured out the issue: v0.8.1 of duckdb has the following:

![image](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb-web/assets/555095/0b0e5ae9-8418-4ea2-bd54-e3cf9919d542)

The proper handling of the ingest options was only committed *after* the v0.8.1 cut and so support for `adbc_ingest` currently only exists if you build off main, not if you're using v0.8.1.

Should we hold off on this until the next version is cut? Or should I just remove this section for now and re-add it with the next version of duckdb?

Reviewer 4: The docs are targeting the next release, so it shouldbe added to the docs before 0.9 is released :+1:

Author: @szarnyasg Can you try the code snippet with a 0.9 build of duckdb and confirm that it works for you too?

Reviewer: @zeroshade the documentation for v0.8.1 is already archived, so this PR is targeting the `dev` version (which will turn into v0.9.0 later this month). So let's get this merged!

I ran the code again on a bleeding edge DuckDB package:
```py
>>> import duckdb
>>> print(duckdb.__version__)
0.8.2-dev3250
```

I got a different error now:

```text
>>> conn = adbc_driver_manager.dbapi.connect(
...     driver=duckdb.__file__,
...     entrypoint="duckdb_adbc_init",
...     db_kwargs={"path": "test.db"}
... )
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
  File "/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/adbc_driver_manager/dbapi.py", line 200, in connect
    db = _lib.AdbcDatabase(**db_kwargs)
         ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "adbc_driver_manager/_lib.pyx", line 569, in adbc_driver_manager._lib.AdbcDatabase.__init__
  File "adbc_driver_manager/_lib.pyx", line 399, in adbc_driver_manager._lib.check_error
adbc_driver_manager.InternalError: INTERNAL: dlopen() failed: dlopen(/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py, 0x0006): tried: '/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py' (not a mach-o file), '/System/Volumes/Preboot/Cryptexes/OS/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py' (no such file), '/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py' (not a mach-o file)
dlopen() failed: dlopen(lib/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py.dylib, 0x0006): tried: 'lib/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py.dylib' (no such file), '/System/Volumes/Preboot/Cryptexes/OSlib/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py.dylib' (no such file), '/opt/homebrew/Cellar/python@3.11/3.11.5/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.11/Resources/Python.app/Contents/MacOS/../../../../../../../../../../../lib/lib/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py.dylib' (no such file), '/usr/lib/lib/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py.dylib' (no such file, not in dyld cache), 'lib/opt/homebrew/lib/python3.11/site-packages/duckdb/__init__.py.dylib' (no such file)
```

I'm uncertain about this - is this a problem with my setup? Please advise.

Author: It looks like for some reason the value of `duckdb.__file__` for you was pointing to `.../duckdb/__init__.py` rather than to the `libduckdb.dylib` correctly. Maybe something about how you built it?

Reviewer 4: As said before, it's no longer `duckdb.__file__`, it's `duckdb.duckdb.__file__` and this is abstracted away with `adbc_driver_duckdb`

Also the entrypoint symbol is not exported when built with `BUILD_PYTHON=1 make`
Only through `python3 setup.py install` (run from the `tools/pythonpkg` folder)

Author: I downloaded and installed the bleeding edge version myself and got it to work, i'll update the docs here.

Author: @Tishj updated, let me know what you think.

@szarnyasg Try the new example with the bleeding edge build?

Reviewer: > @szarnyasg Try the new example with the bleeding edge build?

It works fine now, thanks!

Reviewer 4: Thank you, looks good to me!

I really want to discourage using the raw connect logic, it's needlessly complex and as seen in 0.8.1 -> dev; easily broken

So thanks for using the abstraction!

Reviewer: Great! @zeroshade do you have any further changes to commit or is this good to be merged?

Author: This is good to be merged! I'm gonna file other PRs for adding docs for other languages to this. :smile:

Reviewer: Great, thanks!
